docs: Add stake programming documentation (#14529)
solana-labs/solana: docs/src/staking/stake-programming.md

---
title: Stake Programming
---

> To maximize stake distribution, decentralization, and censorship resistance on 

Author: ```suggestion
To maximize stake distribution, decentralization, censorship resistance on 
```

the Solana network, staking can be performed programmatically. The team
and community have developed several on-chain and off-chain programs to make
stakes easier to manage.

> #### Stake-o-matic

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Stake-o-matic aka Auto-delegation Bots
```

This off-chain program manages a large population of validators staked by a

> central authority. The Solana Foundation uses it to regularaly delegate its

Reviewer: ```suggestion
central authority. The Solana Foundation uses an auto-delegation bot to regularly delegate its
```

> stake to "non-delinquent" validators. More information can be found on the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
stake to "non-delinquent" validators that meet specified performance requirements. More information can be found on the
```

[official announcement](https://forums.solana.com/t/stake-o-matic-delegation-matching-program/790).

#### Stake Pools
This on-chain program pools together SOL to be staked by a manager, allowing SOL
holders to stake and earn rewards without managing stakes.

> Users deposit SOL in exchange for tokens representing ownership in the pool. The pool

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Users deposit SOL in exchange for SPL tokens (staking derivatives) that represent their ownership in the stake pool. The pool
```

manager stakes deposited SOL according to their strategy, perhaps using a variant

> of the Stake-o-matic program. As stakes earn rewards, the pool and pool tokens 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
of an auto-delegation bot as described above. As stakes earn rewards, the pool and pool tokens 
```

> grow proportionally in value. Finally, pool token holders can provide pool

Author: ```suggestion
grow proportionally in value. Finally, pool token holders can send pool
```

> tokens in exchange for SOL, thereby participating in decentralization with much

Reviewer: "provide pool tokens in exchange for SOL". Is this referring to sending SPL tokens back to the stake pool to redeem SOL?

Author: Yes that's exactly it.  Maybe it can be clarified by saying what you said: "send SPL tokens back to the stake pool to redeem SOL"?

Reviewer: Yeah, that sounds good to me

> tokens in exchange for SOL, thereby participating in decentralization with much

Author: ```suggestion
back to the stake pool to redeem SOL, thereby participating in decentralization with much
```
